We're going through a collective death
and rebirth process, an enormous
spiritual breakthrough, but it was the
entire species. We had been gestating
the future human for hundreds of
thousands of years, but the time of
birth is a relatively short, intense
period, but we were becoming a species
of Buddhas and a species of Christ and
prophets. We basically made this deep
turning point.
>> Chris, one of the essential ideas in
your work is that humanity isn't simply
collapsing, it's transforming. What do
you mean by that?
>> When I had started this work, I wasn't
concerned about the fate of humanity,
but what happened was starting in the
22nd, 23rd session, the theme of human
evolution, the theme of the master plan
of humanity, and it kept coming back
again and again, and it it actually
continued all the way to the 70th
session. So, in the 70th session, I was
given one deep deep final vision. The
story had different components, but the
story always had the same fundamental
structure. Humanity was coming to a
turning point. Humanity was coming to a
major breakthrough. This was a
breakthrough in history that would
divide between the before and after.
Just an enormous spiritual breakthrough,
and it was a breakthrough not of
individuals, but it was the entire
species, and it was coming up inside of
it. It was coming up from within the the
collective consciousness. And it was
catapulting us into an accelerated
development beyond anything that we had
known previously.
But in all of these years of visions,
which I present in the book and in this
chapter, the birth of the future human,
I was never shown how nature was going
to accomplish this. It, you know, I did
not understand how it was going to
accomplish this. And then,
in 1995,
in the 55th session,
Uh it took me into deep time into and
took me into the future.
And it gave me an experience
of the death and rebirth of our species.
It took me into the critical turning
point that these visions had been
talking about. And I experienced this
not as an individual. It wasn't Chris
Bache who had this experience. But at
that point, I was completely dissolved
into the species mind into the
collective unconscious. And I
experienced the death and rebirth of our
species as the species.
And it was a it was a period again and
it didn't give me the details. It didn't
give me any specifics about when, where,
and how, but it was a a global systems
crisis triggered by a global ecological
crisis and it continued for decades. It
And it basically triggered a profound
suffering as we lost control of the
conditions of our life. Life as we knew
it was shattered at the core.
And it looked for a time that we would
all be killed. That this was an
extinction process.
But just when it was at its worst,
eventually the crisis passed and things
began to get better and the survivors
began to pick themselves up and began to
recon- put things back together. And
when they began to re-engage each other
and engage life, they found that they
were working in a completely different
internal reality. That values, which had
been activated in the depth of this
crisis, ways of knowing, ways of being
in the world had been activated and a
shift had taken place, we would say, in
the collective unconscious. A shift at
the foundation of our being, the
collective psyche. So the entire
post-crisis world was saturated with new
values, new perspectives, new social
units, new ways of understanding. There
was a a tremendous opening of the human
heart into compassion for other beings,
not only human beings, but for other
beings, other species. There was a
tremendous opening of the human mind to
be open and transparent to the
intelligence of the universe that can
now could now
infuse itself more cleanly and clearly
into our human consciousness. So, I
mean, really honestly, it's it's a
cliché, I know, but we were becoming we
became a species of Buddhas, a a
humanity became a collective Buddhas and
a species of Christ and prophets. We
basically made this deep turning point.
And then it in the 70th session, several
years later, it gave me one final
capstone retrospective in which it
showed me everything that it had shown
me before and gave me a couple of last
pieces of instruction concerning this
transformational process. The reason I
think this is the most important part of
the book is actually because
my personal transformation. Who cares?
One person. But this is all of our
children, all of our grandchildren, our
great grandchildren. This is what
This is our work. This is our collective
work. This is what I'm here for, what
you're here for, what we are all here
for is to participate and to support
this collective transformational
process.
And I think it's been building through
the 20th century. It's been
being going to be continued to build
through the 21st century. A series of
I'm expecting a series of punctuated
crises. This is going to be showing us
we're going to be inheriting uh
Yeah, we're going to be inheriting the
the limitations of our
previous worldview, of our
of our less than conscious participation
on this earth.
>> What's interesting is that this vision
of transformation came after years
moving through what you called the ocean
of suffering.
>> In the first two and a half years, I
went through kind of classic perinatal
symptomology, perinatal what Stan Grof
Grof describes in many of his books. And
I went through at the end of the kind of
a shattering ego death experience. It
just kind of blew me apart, turned me
inside out.
And
then after that, a whole this cycle
began, a cycle that lasted two years of
14 sessions
where in the purifying phase of the
session, which usually for me means the
first half of the session
during the purifying phase of the
session, I went into
uh vast landscapes, panoramas of human
suffering that went progressively deeper
and deeper session by session.
Uh and at first I thought this was a
deepening of ego death.
But over time, I became convinced that
this was more than that. It had to be
more than that because it involved
subjectively so many thousands of people
and so many thousands of years.
Eventually, I came to the conclusion
that
something had shifted inside my sessions
and the consciousness that was directing
my sessions, that's using my sessions to
heal not my personal psyche but some
aspect of the collective unconscious of
humanity.
>> [snorts]
>> Uh and so
what happened was I did this work for a
year. I stopped my work for six years.
And then I began it again after six
years for another year.
The ocean of suffering, when I resumed
after six years, began exactly where I
had stopped. I think is an indication of
the extraordinary intelligence and the
precision of that intelligence that
directing work.
I was never in control of what happened
in my sessions. You can set when you're
working I worked at 500 to 600
micrograms.
Uh per sessions of very high doses of
LSD.
I don't recommend this protocol. I
honestly don't knowing what I know now.
But when you do this work, you can set
all the intentions you want. You can't
direct what's happening in your
sessions. So, I think of it as a
collaboration, a cooperation. My
responsibility was to create as clean a
field as possible to allow clear
contact. So, totally isolated from the
world, totally internally focused, and
at the end of every session writing a
detailed transcript of what happened
during the sessions. I think that's
important because it really helps us
learn and hold on to what happened. And
then it provides a clearer foundation
when we return to the psychedelic state
in the next session. After that, what
happened in the sessions is entirely a
matter of a larger consciousness that
was directing my experiences or
organizing my experiences. And I think
this went far beyond
anything in my personal unconscious
because you know, the scale of the
sessions are just
far vaster than anything I could dream
up or imagine on my own.
>> But still, you described so much pain.
Why did you continue?
>> Well,
it's because of what happened at the in
the second half of the sessions. First
step in the sessions, I was taken into
this terrible pain and suffering.
Uh
and in the when I would go through that
and one of the most profound lessons I
learned from Stan Grof is to completely
trust the process. So, if you don't
fight what's happening, if you give
yourself over to it completely, it will
build and build. You'll hit a crescendo.
And if you navigate this crescendo well,
you'll be spun into positive
transpersonal spaces for the remainder
of the session. So, these sessions were
not just ocean of suffering, but they
were the ocean of suffering in the first
hour or two, and then I would be spun
into this extraordinary series of
experiences of that I describe in Deep
Time and the Soul
and the initiation of the universe. So,
that at the end of the session, what I
would internalize was a phase of intense
suffering, and then hours of ecstatic
participation
in some aspect of the universe itself.
So, I would go back to it because I
wanted that initiation into the
universe.
>> One of the more radical ideas in the
book is that suffering itself emerges
from love. How do pain and love coexist?
>> Well, because creation comes from love,
and I think the pain that I was
encountering here
was the pain that is somehow lodged in
the collective psyche. The pain of human
suffering over thousands and thousands
of years. All the wars, all the terrible
things we've done to each other, all the
rapes, all the brutality, all this
terrible suffering. And if the suffering
is not cleared at the end of an
individual life, it's not only the
individual who has to bear the
consequences of that undigested pain,
but the species itself, the
the species mind, the the collective
unconscious of our species must also
bear the burden of somehow reconciling
itself with this terrible pain, which it
does in different ways, but one of the
ways it's that seems to have happened is
I was able to go
dissolve into the collective
unconscious, and when the healing
process deepened, it represented some
type of lifting out of the collective
psyche this magnitude of suffering. And
so, when I say the suffering began in
pain, what I mean is that all existence
begins in divine love. And that one of
the things I was shown in this process
was
we are actually co-creators in this
process. We're not victims. This isn't
being done to us. Existence is not being
inflicted on us, and it's not a veil of
tears. We're not being punished for
anything. But creation is a long
process, very long and drawn out with
many, many stages of incompleteness
before we get to the greater places
where we are still going.
And so, that we knew we were getting
into this when we chose to participate
in creation. We knew we were going to be
dealing with a very unfinished and as as
yet imperfect system.
And
we volunteered for this process because
of the grandeur of what is taking place,
the grandeur of creation itself, moving
from very simple organisms to very
complicated organisms, from unconscious
organisms to self-conscious and
deepening self-conscious organisms.
That's the That's the love out of which
the pain emerged. And the pain is simply
the struggles, you know, the inherent
struggles uh of existing on this planet.
>> Do you think suffering comes from
disconnection from source, or is
suffering itself part of transformation?
>> I have a chapter in the book, which I
take as maybe the most important
chapter, of the birth of the future
human. So, I'm looking at this
historical crisis that we're entering,
this global systems crisis, as the
context which is giving birth to a
fundamentally
changed human being, creating a shift in
the collective psyche that will get to.
And so, I speak of that as a birth, and
it is a birth, but it's not a birth in
the sense being trapped in a birth canal
or something like this. It's a larger
dynamic
of a species which is in the process of
self-transforming, self-emerging into a
higher order of itself.
>> One of my favorite moments in the book
was the idea of remember who you are.
What did that realization actually mean
to you?
>> It would probably take us too long to go
through the entire session. The
important part of this session after
going through this kind of Venetian
blind flipping back and forth between
the terrible pain of the suffering of
existence, flipping into the great
sweetness, some extraordinary sweetness,
going back and forth until eventually
the process took me into this beautiful
moment of clarity and it showed me that
the sweetness that I was experiencing
was not the origin of pleasure, but the
origin of existence itself.
And with that this a bubble broke and
I came to a remembering of who I was in
a deeper level, that I was
consciousness. I was part of the
consciousness that was the creative
impulse of our universe, and that we are
all sourced in this creative
intelligence, this creative
consciousness which is driving our
universe forward.
This was
it became really this session was all
about remember, remember who you are,
remember what you are. And really gets
down to a very basic point.
Our memories define the limits of our
being.
We we are what we remember being. Most
of us don't have memories beyond early
childhood. But, when you work with
psychedelics and enter non-ordinary
states of consciousness or through
meditation or near-death experiences or
any number of different contexts,
we can remember, we can our memories can
be extended, our remembering can be
extended beyond
our childhood, beyond even birth, beyond
even former lives. When we remember
very, very deeply, our memories take us
back to the creative impulse of
existence itself, the very impulse that
brought time and space into being.
To remember that deeply, to have this
essay memory, suddenly changes your
self-definition, your sense of who and
what you are. You become
you understand that you are part of the
creative universe. You're part of the
energy that's creating the universe. And
with that, there's a just a tremendous
reframing of your understanding of what
your life is about and your
understanding of what life itself is
about.
>> In session 19, something changes. In the
circle of learning, it feels like
consciousness itself becomes a teacher.
>> There were several
preliminary experiences, but eventually
I came into a an arena where
I was in dialogue with this
consciousness, and I could know anything
that I wanted to know if I could endure
it. But And so, in this arena, I would
ask questions, and it would respond to
me by orchestrating my experience in
order to show me what it was that I
wanted to understand.
And then eventually it took me on what I
call the cosmic tour. It seemed to be
the creative intelligence of the
universe, and it seemed to be delighted
to be able to finally be showing human
beings uh and me only as representative
of my species coming back to the
creative intelligence, and it wanted to
show us what it had accomplished during
all these 13.7 billions of years. And it
would take me somewhere and show me
something, and I would understand. And
sometimes what I saw was so mesmerizing,
I would sort of stop and be just
dumbfounded it by the beauty of it and
it would hurry it would come back to me
and it would say, "Hurry up. Hurry up.
I've got more to show you." It was just
It's astounding that the magnitude of
the intelligence that's embedded in our
universe, that manifest our universe,
and the magnitude of the love
that lies at the very font of creation.
This was a staggering
revelation for me. When I began this
work, even though I have a background
in, you know, religious studies,
I began this work as an atheist. I began
this work as an agnostic, an
atheistically inclined agnostic. I
really was very skeptical
about the reality of a transcendent
dimension or the knowability of a
transcendent dimension. So, this was a a
major kind of shift in my worldview to
even envision the possibility that we
could enter into states which were so
cognitively rich as these states were.
>> So, on the tour, what was the best thing
you were shown?
>> The challenging part is
that I simply don't have enough PhDs to
hold in my conscious awareness many of
the things that I was shown. If I had
PhDs in physics, astrophysics, and
cosmology, I would have a better chance
of being able to have retained
cognitively specific information that I
was shown at that in those
circumstances. In other sessions, I had
very powerful experiences and I was able
to bring them back because they were
somewhat related to things that I was
educated in.
I I was shown many things about
reincarnation. I was shown many things
about how reincarnation works. It led me
to to have an understanding of
reincarnation is very different than the
way it's presented in Eastern cultures.
To me,
to me reincarnation is a fact of life.
There's overwhelming empirical evidence
that this is the case. We didn't have
this evidence 50 years ago. We do today.
Uh but kind of a psychologically what
motivated what was behind the my writing
that book uh though I don't discuss it
in the book was in the sessions my own
experience of the karmic
intentionality of my life and some of my
former lives that surfaced in the
sessions themselves. I I see
reincarnation as a as part of evolution.
It's the higher octave of revolution of
evolution. So, if evolution evolves
whole groups, it folds collective
learning forward in time. Somehow nature
has found a way or the intelligence of
nature has found a way to evolve
individuals within certain species and
to fold individual learning forward in
time. So, it's not just individual human
beings who are reincarnating. All of
Excuse me. All of humanity is
reincarnating and that means we're we're
all growing together and all of us
growing together is part of our species
evolving and growing and developing new
capacities over long periods of time.
So, it's very much of an evolutionary
dynamic. I I want to really emphasize
even though I went through many layers
of suffering in this process, I don't
carry any trauma from this work. I mean,
there's nothing undigested that that
bothers me because uh I saw it through
to its conclusion. I took it all the way
down to the base. Whatever was given to
me, I took it down to the base and was
much more than amply rewarded in the
ecstatic experiences that followed. So,
the whole cycle of going into pain,
breaking through the pain, going into
the reward
phase of a session, that's what I
internalize. That's So, now
yeah, having done this work, uh um
some of the blessings that I received in
later sessions were the direct
correlation or the consequence of having
done the collective cleansing. So,
the principle of karma is whatever we do
for others comes back to us in one form
or another. So, I had been given an
opportunity and an invitation to help
in this collective transformation. And I
think this nothing
nothing terribly heroic. This is what
any mother would do for her children.
Any father would do for his children. If
you saw someone suffering and you had an
opportunity to help them and not make
them not suffer,
any human being worth their salt could
do that. Same thing happened here. This
opened in the sessions. I had an
opportunity. I just took the
opportunity.
Then later in the sessions,
when this light began to fill me and
when I began to enter into
orders of ecstasy and and beatific
visions,
uh that
really
was a crescendo in many of many years of
work.
Uh that was
that was the natural organic manifesting
within my individual awareness of the
historic process that humanity is going
through as a collective. We are going
through a purification process. We're
going through a detoxification process.
We're going through a collective death
and rebirth process, and that will be
very, very clear in the decades ahead.
We're going through a death rebirth
process, but death is followed by
rebirth. Purification is followed by
ecstatic joy.
Uh so, I hope that some of the
Now, some of the experiences I've had,
some of the learnings that I've been
given
uh some of the training in terms of
focusing my consciousness
w-
is
I [clears throat] trust that it is
affecting me and it is benefiting me
outside of the sessions both directly
and indirectly.
But actually I think the proof that's in
the pudding when I die.
Als- In Buddhism all spiritual practice
is training you for what will happen
when you die.
>> Absolutely.
>> Uh so
I think the same thing is true in
psychedelic sessions. If you engage them
conscientiously,
they are training you and preparing for
you to enter into states of
consciousness that are waiting for you
when you die.
And so
I think there's a strong correlation
there.
>> What did you learn about death?
>> I've had many experiences that basically
make sense. I understand them in terms
of the Eastern concept of the Bardo or
the multiple levels of reality one
enters when you die.
Uh the basic idea is that you don't go
to a place, but there is you go to a a
complex domain which has many many
layers and the level that you go to
reflects the level of your present
spiritual development, your ability to
stay conscious. So all of these levels
are part of the Bardo. They're part of
Samsara. They're part of the evolving
cyclic nature of uh
you know
of nature, the the cyclic patterns of
nature. It's also possible to go
penetrate all the way through the Bardo
and enter extrasamsaric reality, what is
sometimes called extrasamsaric or beyond
the domain of Samsara.
Um
this I would place the uh the diamond
luminosity experiences
at extrasamsaric reality, outside that
reality.
So, where one goes when one dies really
depends upon
>> [clears throat]
>> how much homework one has done while one
is here.
>> Are you now even afraid of death?
>> Being afraid of death is just such a
sadness. I mean, I'm not Not only am I
not afraid of dying, but I'm looking
forward to being dead. I mean, I'm not
looking forward to the act of dying.
But, there's absolutely no fear for me
in what happens to what will happen to
me when I die, and I'm looking forward
to it because I've I've crossed that
line multiple times over the course of
all these years of work. And so, I feel
comfortable where I'm going. I'm filled
with ecstatic joy of where I'm going,
and I think it's It's not just me, but I
think we should all be filled with
ecstatic expectations, ecstatic joy at
the prospect of where we go. If we are
afraid of death, then we've got our
entire entire world upside down.
The hard work is done inside time and
space. This is the hard place.
Where we go when we die is not the far
hard place. All this Hollywood
malarkey about the shadows and darkness
and blah blah blah and demonic and blah
blah blah.
No, it's it's much more benign than
that. It's much more intelligent than
that. It's much more compassionate than
that. Um
Yes. So, to me
death is something I'm looking forward
to.
You can die. And the very structure of
your life can be completely dissolved.
But,
you will reawaken some essence of you,
some
a better version of you will wake up in
a different reality, a a total
unexpected joy.
You learn that there really is no such
thing truly as death.
The form of your life can be destroyed,
but the essence of your life is
indestructible, and therefore you cannot
die.
Now,
that doesn't mean that in some way it
gets easier, but when you're going
through the middle of an advanced death
and rebirth process, it's still
terrifying, and it's still frightening
just because it is a deep deep
unraveling of anything you've ever
known.
Uh so that the unraveling in the
beginning is the unraveling of your
time-space identity, your body-mind ego.
But as you do it, as you repeat it, you
get a little more used to it. So that
aspect of the total total fear that
grips you in the beginning,
that's that ceases.
What happens is that death becomes your
best friend. I learned late in the the
last 5 years of work that there are many
degrees of dying,
and the deepest ecstatic experiences,
the deepest visionary experiences are of
follow are follow follow the deepest
death experiences. Once you understand
that, once you understand that there are
levels and levels of dying, followed by
levels and levels of ecstatic
revelation, then death becomes your
friend. You You not only don't want to
avoid it, you seek it out. You create
conditions in your sessions where you
want the turbulence and the destructing
that is associated with death, and you
you choose it because you know what's
waiting for you on the other side of
this radical destructing. So death
becomes your best friend, death becomes
your mistress.
>> Sure.
>> I mean, it sounds strange to put it that
way, but
you know, death is your gateway into
transcendence.
>> Chris, thank you so much for being here.
Your book was truly revelatory for me,
and I'm grateful we had the opportunity
to explore some of these ideas together.
Thank you. We have a new class starting
in June, an investigation into the
occulted technology of ancient Egypt.
Come visit us at magicalegyptstore.com.